May 15.
Testing on May 15.
Testing 2 on May 15.
Now we're testing for the second time.
Testing, testing.
What would you like for me to say?
This is May 15.
We're in 207 in the Evans Library, and I have the honor and pleasure of chatting
with Dr. Ralph Zangaro, distinguished professor of chemistry, about his experiences here at A&M.
To introduce yourself to anybody that might hear this tape or read a transcription, give us a biographical summary
Oh, a brief summary.
Yeah, before you came to A&M.
This will be chronological.
Yeah, where, you know, family background, and what did mom and dad do, and growing up, and where'd you go to school, and all that.
Well, I'll do that.
That's no problem.
I was born and raised in New York City, specifically in Bensonhurst, if you've ever heard of it, which is the Italian conclave of New York City.
My mother was born in New Castle, Pennsylvania, but she was taken to Italy when she was three years old.
My father came to the United States when he was about fifteen and I remember him telling me that he landed in New Haven, Connecticut where he had some family connections and got on the train and went to Johnstown, Pennsylvania, where he got a job in the paper mill shoveling lime and if you've ever dealt with
anhydrous lime, you can appreciate what a most unpleasant job that is.
At any rate, he married my mother and she came back to this country and they bought a house.
He at that time relocated with respect both to geography and work, and actually for the good many years, until World War II, worked in a shoe factory.
Where?
In New York City.
In the city.
It was a very, they made high-class women's shoes.
Well, there's a lot of interesting story goes with that, but I'm going to skip it.
But I came from a very traditional Italian family.
In other words, the mother stayed home, did the cooking, washing, ironing, et cetera, kept the house clean and raised the kids.
How many boys and girls?
There were two, we were five, three boys, two girls.
I went to New York City public schools, and interestingly, public school and high school is interesting in the sense that I was always in the company of a large contingent of Jewish students, because adjoining Bensonhurst is a region called Bay Ridge, pardon me, Bay Ridge is there, but this is Borough Park is the
Jewish location, so I got there.
My father would always say, watch the Jewish kids, because they're very interested in education and learning, and they set a good example for you.
And that was a very good example, but at any rate, we didn't have much money, but we always loved, and they were lacking for a sense of security, and plenty to eat, that sort of thing.
But he said, but he kept telling me, if I'm going to go to college, there's only one place I can go, that was the City College in New York,
Which was free.
I went to New Utrecht High School.
New Utrecht.
And I was, now at the time I went, I was admitted in 1941, New Utrecht City College of New York was a strictly scholarship high school.
There were just so many places and you took some exams, they looked at your records, et cetera, and then once they reached the 1500 or the number they admitted to freshman, that was it.
It's changed drastically since then.
It's now an open university.
How diverse, meaning how varied, was the City College student body?
The City College student body was largely Jewish, but that's the first place throughout my education in New York City that I ever came in contact with blacks.
Prior to that through
public school, junior high school, high school, I had never known a black man, never.
At City College there were some blacks.
And it's located in Harlem, 137th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
So when I got off the subway, it was an hour and 15 minute subway to and back.
At any rate, it was a great education.
It didn't cost me anything.
Now did your parents encourage you to go to college?
Very much so, yeah, yeah, yeah.
We all did, except one sister didn't go to college but she went to nursing school.
And when did you begin to think about what your major would be?
Probably as a junior, not until I was a junior, did I sign up for a chemistry major.
I had asthma and I took off when I was about 18 for Arizona where I finished one semester at the University of Arizona and I disliked Arizona with a passion for a very simple reason, it never rained.
That made me very, very despondent.
I really was praying for some rain and just the smell and freshness of a rainstorm.
So I went back and this was 1946, my brothers were back from the
having served in the armed forces.
My two brothers, they were older than I. And I just sort of randomly applied to graduate school.
I ended up at the University of Kansas.
Now you had graduated at City College in what year?
Yes, 46.
In chemistry?
In chemistry, yeah.
Then went out to Arizona for a graduate
No, no.
I had not completed my undergraduate work at City College.
I had one more semester.
And I shan't go into my adventures in Arizona because I had a job, well, heck, compared, where I worked six days a week from five till two, that's how many hours a day, seven hours, no, it's more than that.
It's nine hours, isn't it?
From five in the afternoon to two in the morning.
And I got paid $25 every two weeks.
But I managed to save $400 out of that, which helped me get through college, pay my tuition at the University of Arizona, which was a pleasant place.
I enjoyed it.
So then when I got back to New York City, it was spring of 46, and I applied to graduate school, and I ended up going to the University of Kansas, which I was just so surprised to see what a beautiful campus that was.
It's a lovely place.
Well, I'm not going to go into detail.
I got my degree.
I met my wife there, a very pretty Kansas girl.
We're still married after 52 years.
And let's see, oh yeah, then I went to work for the Eastman Kodak Company.
That was my first job in Rochester, New York.
I was 25 years old.
And I stayed there for two years and I think I did some very nice work and I got nothing but praise for the organization.
They treated me well.
It was a pleasant place to work.
People treated me nicely.
The people with whom I worked were good people in their professions and I enjoyed working with them.
But I decided I was going to teach school.
I went to the University of Arkansas for
Not very long.
I did not like Fayetteville, Arkansas.
I thought it was terribly isolated.
So I ended up getting another industrial job at the American Psy Animate Company in Winchester, Massachusetts, and they had an Atomic Energy Commission contract.
After about a year, they said, well, the Atomic Energy Commission was not going to renew the contract, so we should look elsewhere for work.
Now, the company itself was willing to relocate me within the company, but they wanted to send me to Bound Brook, New Jersey, the pigments division, which was very unexciting because the buildings were old, the dust was everywhere, and that's how I wrote to my professor when he told me about Texas A&M had a job opening.
And that's what got me here.
Now, your special area of emphasis in chemistry was what?
Well, inorganic chemistry, but specifically what we call metalloids.
I got interested in metalloids at Eastman Kodak working with selenium, which is a metalloid element.
So I came to Texas and came by way of Buffalo.
There were no interstates at the time, I don't believe.
I had one daughter, a year old daughter at the time.
And so here I am since 1954.
Now, when I first got here, I was a little bit shocked at the teaching load we had, because we met with our students 13 hours a week.
Lecture, large lecture of groups of about 100, and then that was broken down to smaller groups of 20 each, where we just met them, and it was
Gave them assignments, went over problems, and got to know the students quite well on an individual basis, which I thought was very nice.
Of course, at the time, they were all in the Corps.
There was another girl there.
Now, this is the fall of 40?
No, 54.
54.
Okay.
As you were doing your homework about Texas A&M,
What did you think Texas A&M was like before you got here?
I had no idea.
I had no idea for the simple reason that I didn't get to know about the school until April, late April.
That's too late to apply for a teaching job.
It's too late.
And my professor at the University of Kansas said that this is available.
I've written a good letter of recommendation, so if you want it, you can have it.
So I didn't have that much leeway in seeking another job.
When you came, and this is the only dollar question I'm going to ask you, what was your beginning salary?
I don't remember exactly, but it was in the neighborhood of $400 to $425 a month.
That was... Nine months or 12 months apart?
Nine months.
Yeah.
And who was the person...
that contacted you for the department?
Fred Jensen, who was the head of the department.
J-E-N?
J-E-N-S-E-N.
A very nice man.
He was the department head.
Describe the department's makeup.
Who was here in chemistry then?
Oh, my heavens.
The ones that were here then, there was Errol Middleton.
Errol Bathurst Middleton was his name.
George Mario Watson.
And George left shortly after I came.
He was a very, very good chemist.
He went on to Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and I kept in touch with him many years.
A fine man and a very fine chemist.
Thomas Burkhalter was here.
And those are some I remember.
Gosh, there are a good many others, but those are the ones I remember.
But one gentleman I do remember, I'm still
Stay in touch with him.
He was not a faculty member, but Pete Rodriguez, a great guy, just a wonderful individual, just a really good person.
What was Pete's duties then?
He was, I would say, administrative assistant.
In other words, he looked to see that the labs were, if they were told that lab needs a paint job, he'd communicate with the people on campus to get the painters over.
If somebody had to move some books or something, he, so that's the kind of thing he did if you needed
chemicals and they were not available, he ordered them for you, that kind of thing.
Just a, really, just a first class individual.
Was John Beckham in there?
John Beckham was very, he was the department head's right hand man.
He would make out teaching schedules.
He would, like John Taft taught also, he met classes.
Dr. Harrington was no longer in the department.
No, Harrington was gone at that time, M.T.
Harrington, he was gone.
Yeah, I remember that.
describe the chemistry facilities, the chemistry buildings?
Well, at the time, the only building there, we've got such an extensive facility now, was what we call the old, the original chemistry building, built about 1930, 32, under the WPA.
But as far as research, I was just greatly disappointed, because there are no research facilities, virtually no, there were a few graduate students that were just initiating a graduate program.
But I was not impressed, let me put it that way, because the department was strictly really a service department.
When you got here, how long did you think you would probably stay at Texas A&M?
Well, I must admit, I didn't think I would stay very long because I had job offers during the first four or five years.
Every year I had a job offer somewhere.
I don't know.
Then you're talking about some very personal psychological problems.
I had changed jobs three, four times.
I felt I'd better settle down somewhere and prove that I can do something at one place.
Describe moving wife and family and- That I was very, very lucky.
Very lucky.
Because I worked for the American Scientist Company, a product company, and that was the Atomic Energy Commission Government Project.
So they moved me from where I was in Arkansas, they paid for that, to Washington.
I mean, well not Washington, it was a town in Massachusetts, Winchester.
And then, since they had lost their contract,
I got all my expenses paid moving from Winchester to College Station.
I was very lucky.
Now what did you all move?
How much furniture and stuff?
Well, just a very modest amount.
You know, just standard stuff.
It was not a lot of stuff.
Describe finding a place for you and your family to live.
Well, that was pretty easy because there was apartments that are gone now.
that we were told about, and it was very cheap, 45 bucks a month.
Over at Southgate, on the south side of the camp?
Oh, you remember where the drive-in used to be there, where the churches are located now?
Oh, up at Northgate.
Northgate, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, in that neighborhood.
Who else lived in those apartments?
Were they most of them?
Oh, no, interestingly, most of the residents there were Army officers, because the Air Force Base,
where we have our adjunct campus now, still was in operation.
So almost everyone was an Army officer, and they were nice people to have around.
They were very sociable, very friendly, and we got to know them quite well.
How were you and your wife received by the department and others in the neighborhood?
Oh, now, as far as that's concerned, everyone was extremely friendly.
I mean, they tried their best to make us feel at home.
Give some examples of a New Yorker moving to this almost rural area.
What did you have to learn about Texas?
Well, like I say, I was born and raised in Bensonhurst.
It's an Italian neighborhood and we could put great emphasis on food.
basic and integral part of the Italian culture, eating well.
So one of the things I missed was a lack of decent restaurants and very, very nice grocery stores.
The grocery store situation, I don't know if you recollect at that time, was virtually nonexistent.
That was a real let down.
Orr's was probably the closest.
That's about the only one also.
And about the only restaurant was, gosh, the place that's out of business now where they had, they used to call it Blood
Oh, heavens.
It's funny because one of the subsequent graduate students, Bloodhound, he called it, Youngbloods.
Youngbloods.
Youngbloods, right.
They call it the Bloodhound.
Yeah, yeah.
But that was about the only place.
And a little after that, Clayton's Open, where the bank is now.
And he ran a pretty decent shop there.
It was okay.
And let's see, what kind of automobiles did you have?
Oh, heavens.
I had it.
When I came here, was it a...
It was a 53 Dodge.
Yeah that's what it was, 53 Dodge.
Pretty good.
And what were your, do you remember your first year's duties?
Oh heavens, well yeah.
Like I said we had met with our students 13 hours a week.
What courses?
And in addition to that, in addition we had labs.
What courses were you teaching at first?
Just freshman, and then once a year they had me teaching a senior inorganic course.
Did they make any promises to you about the future?
No.
No, no, and I was just disillusioned the first number of years, I must say.
I had one good outlet, though, and I'll get to that when you're ready for it.
Go ahead.
Oh, okay.
Now, since we had a nine-month appointment, summer was free.
I had worked with American Cyanimate Company,
I worked with what was called the Minerals Dressing Division, and they were working on uranium ores, extracting uranium from its ores.
So I had learned about the Association of Western Universities or something like that at Oak Ridge, so I applied, and that experience of American Cyanamid, they put me on for the summer, and that was a great connection because it kept my hand and my mind alive in research.
And I got to know some very good chemists there.
How long did you go up there in the summers?
Just three months.
But subsequent to that I had three more summers.
Then I spent two years as a temporary employee at the laboratory.
And then I spent one more year as a National Science Foundation fellow at the laboratories.
I had seven years total at Oak Ridge Laboratory.
I enjoyed the terrain.
I mean East Tennessee is very beautiful, very beautiful.
And the laboratory was absolutely first class with respect to personnel who were very competent.
and uh facilities which were first class so it was a great thing for me for a newcomer was there any social life for for the chemistry families well people would invite you to their homes occasionally i can't don't recollect any departmental affairs who were particularly uh thoughtful to you and your wife tom burkhalter got to know him quite well although he left not
The morning after I got there he went to Texas Instruments, and George Watson,
He was there for about five years, but he would go out periodically.
George was married to a Mexican, no, he was not married to a Mexican lady.
His mother was Mexican, so he was a Mexican wasp is what he was.
And George was a very sociable type.
We'd go to Mexican restaurants in Tanzarapes when it was outdoors.
I don't know if you recollect that.
We'd go there quite often.
In those first year or two when you were living in the apartment, describe your typical day's routine.
What time did you get up and how did you get over here and what did you do during the day?
Well, I was at school all day, although we typically start at 8 o'clock.
Did you walk over?
I don't.
Part of the time, my life would take me over.
And then parking was difficult then also.
But it was close.
It was very close.
I mean, it was just a 10-minute walk.
Well, we had two, you know, one kid and my second child didn't come until 57, so it was a few years later.
But we had a hell of a lot to do at school because we did not have the photocopying or secretarial help that we have currently.
Maybe we'd have to often do our own typing.
run off on mimeograph machines, our exams and handouts and such.
So I was pretty darn busy all day long.
And, let's see, this was your first academic appointment?
Yeah.
So you had to work on lectures?
That's right.
You'd sit down and prepare your lectures.
That was not too bad, though.
Did you have a personal office, or did you have to share it?
Well, it varied.
At times I would share it with, I remember I'd promote SARMA, was my...
My office partner, I smiled a little bit because he was a homeopathy, these guys that deal with it.
When you take tiny amounts, it's supposed to, you know, he had these drawers full of these damn things.
He was a good guy.
And did you have, didn't have teaching assistants then, did you?
No, we didn't have teaching assistants because the graduate program was, for all practical purposes, nonexistent.
And where'd you eat lunch?
Gosh, I forget.
I don't remember exactly, to tell you the truth.
You don't remember whether you brought a brown bag or not?
I used to bring it sometimes, but not always, or else I'd just skip and wait until I got home at night.
And did you turn to anybody for advice?
Was there some senior person that... Well, I'll tell you the truth.
My feeling about the senior people, that they had such a provincial...
traditional attitude about, in other words, there was no ambition.
There was no, there weren't no research facilities.
You can't blame these people.
There were no planning for the future.
And the few graduate students were working on their masters, not their doctoral.
Well, they would, no, they were getting doctorates too.
Oh, were they?
Okay.
Yeah, yeah.
Did anybody attempt to give you guidelines or rules, tell you some do's and some don'ts?
Mostly about schedules, you know, make sure you're back before the
full session begins, things like that.
But no, I didn't get much advice along those lines.
All right.
You weren't told, be here, stay at least till 5 o'clock?
No, no, no, no, no.
I never was told that.
But I remember they had a whistle.
They had one of those factory whistles.
That, I recollect, yes.
Yes, I remember the factory whistle.
Who were the notable campus administrators when you first got here?
Well, M.T.
Harrington, I remember.
was pretty much the big boys here.
I don't even remember who the president was at that time.
David Morgan, I think.
Well, he was trying to change things, David Morgan, but I think they booted his ass out of here, didn't they?
Yes, I think Morgan was trying to change this place.
Since he was a chemist, did you get to see Dr. Harrington much?
No, I didn't.
But I'll say a little story about Dr. Harrington.
Because when I first came, the first week I came was before classes began.
We had orientation meetings.
And the thing that struck me, being from the Northeast, was he made some remark that he tells us about Texas A&M University.
And then, I can't quote him now, but he says, and then we have the
term, the way he said it, I'm not sure, Negro or Negro, something like that, campus at Prairie View.
And that kind of made me feel, gee whiz, what have I gotten myself into?
These guys have a separate physical location for the blacks, you know.
But now when you were at KU, Kansas was still segregated.
Oh no, I don't believe so.
Really?
No.
See, I went there right after the war.
We were full of, you know, what do they call those people who had their way paid by the... G.I.
Bill.
G.I.
Bill people, and blacks were on a football team.
What were your first impressions of Aggie students that you had in class?
Now, the students, I was greatly impressed with the students.
They were always very, very personable, friendly.
courteous, and then they never gave me any trouble, except a story that I'll relate to subsequently.
No, my feeling was very favorable because as I say, they were friendly, courteous, and they never bitched about anything.
They did their assignments, I thought, seriously.
Did anybody tell you about how many needed to pass or fail?
No, no, I never was told that.
Honestly, I was never told such a thing.
And, all right, describe your routine in class.
Start a semester and finish it in those early years.
What was it?
What did you do the first day of class?
Well, the thing I did at first was introduce myself and,
told them about the course, what was expected of them, that they should, their homework would be turned in and it would play a serious part in their final grade.
That my, you know, we had regular office hours and those told them, they'll be in my office at this time every day or whatever it was and you're welcome to come in.
Any question you have, be it personal or an assignment question that you can't handle or with which you are having trouble, you're welcome.
And as I say, the students always were, they never gave me a hard time.
This, I think, is the feeling I got.
Until one event, one event subsequent to this, this was when the place became co-ed.
It's an interesting little story though.
One, so, there was, when you got five sections, now the bad part about it,
was each, the groups meant group of 100 and then jointly and then some sections of 20.
And you give them an assignment, you go over it, you go through a certain routine of lecture.
When I got to about the fourth time, it got terribly boring.
I mean it was terribly boring.
So by the time I got to going over the same material the fourth and fifth times,
I felt that that particular group was getting shortchanged because my heart wasn't in it, it was just rote, just rote.
At any rate, my relationships with the students were fine, there were no problems.
And how capable were they?
Well, on average they seemed quite good.
You know, I thought their performance was quite acceptable.
Do you have any stories about Country Boys or City Slickers trying to... Well, I remember one kid, to this day, I can't get over it.
You know, we read off the cards.
We had registration cards.
And you go through the cards, you know, John Jones, Billy Brown, et cetera.
And I got to this one, and I was terribly embarrassed because I made a mistake.
Well, the card said Panty Joe.
And I said to this boy, I said, is that correct?
I says, they must have made a mistake in registering you.
He says, no, that was his given name.
P-A-N-T-Y-J-O-E.
Panty Joe Pantormule.
I still remember the kid, Pantormule.
But at any rate, that's a real event.
Did any of them try to give you excuses about a grandparent dying?
No, no.
The day before test or anything like that?
I don't remember that.
No, they were good.
Their attendance was good.
Did you grade on the curve?
I think all, I don't know, I can't say all of us, but most of us kind of adjusted grades.
You know, if a guy gets 67,
You're liable.
You're very likely to give him a C. But I just try to distribute it.
If a guy gets a 56 or a 57, liable to pass him.
If he gets an 88, liable to give him an A. Yes, I did that.
All right.
Now, basically, what majors were taking these introductory chemistry courses?
Well, mostly the great majority were
Agriculture and engineering.
They're very, virtually all is my recollection, because those were the big colleges here at the time.
Ag was very big.
What do you think you told your wife about, after the first few weeks, what do you think you told your wife about what it was like to be a faculty member at the A&M College of Texas?
Well, I don't think I told them much, actually.
I didn't want, she had a little kid take care of, I didn't want to upset her.
I wasn't too, didn't feel like I had a great prestige job, that's for sure, because I had been to City College, I had been to the University of Kansas, and the way things were done there were just vastly different.
I mean, this, this was just like a, I don't know how to put it, but like a school, like they said at the time, to train men for the armed forces.
I was not aware of a great deal of scholarship or certainly was not much research going on.
Now, your title, were you an assistant professor?
Assistant professor, I came as assistant.
And we didn't have a tenure system then, so that wasn't a factor.
At the end of the first year or so, were there salary increases?
Oh, very, if any, they were very modest.
I remember once we weren't getting paid, and they said, you're going to get warrants, which the state would make good subsequently.
I remember that event.
But I never was paid really well.
To this day, I'd still like to make 100 grand a year, which I've never achieved.
But one very important thing happened to me.
It came in 54.
I had been to Oak Ridge and worked with those people.
In 58 I received a research grant from the Atomic Energy Commission.
Luckily for me because I had worked in an area where I had some experience which was of interest to them.
So that started me off on doing some real research and I got some graduate students then too.
And a year or two later I got a Welch grant so I was doing quite well research wise.
And we had quite a change.
Well, let's see, Dr. Martell had not yet come on the scene.
He had not yet come on the scene.
Do you remember who preceded him as Department of Health?
Well, there were a bunch, but we had some fellows who came for like a year, year and a half, like Swalinski.
Yeah, yeah.
Isbell.
They didn't stay too long.
Was Tex Isbell on the faculty when you got here?